# Pupil-Driven-Differential-Phase-Contrast
To overcome these challenges, we propose a novel pupil-driven differential phase contrast (PD-DPC) framework that integrates the PTF information determined by the optical system into the cost function of DPC deconvolution. Although the PTF is not universally equivalent to an edge-detection filter based on its spectral characteristics and spatial response, under the asymmetric illumination used in DPC imaging, the system PTF becomes odd-symmetric and band-limited. Within its passband, the PTF exhibits a gradient-like response. This response leads to edge enhancement. Therefore, we design an edge-sparsity-promoting penalty that suppresses noise while preserving fine features. Meanwhile, the convolution is duplicated in the data fidelity term to achieve a Retinex-like filtering, enabling automatic background rectification. The PD-DPC cost function is solved using Split Bregman methods with our developed iterative reweighted soft-threshold operator. In addition, the illumination pupil can be adaptively optimized based on the edge response cost function of specific patterns. The proposed PD-DPC is hardware-agnostic and demonstrates superior robustness across diverse imaging scenarios. Extensive validation on both simulated and experimental datasets shows improved phase fidelity, edge extraction, and background suppression over state-of-the-art (SOTA) qDPC methods. The PD-DPC imaging extends beyond transparent samples, enabling high-resolution imaging of absorbing tissues, illustrating its potential for label-free pathology imaging and dynamic live-cell analysis.
